These are some test files for WordPerfect import filter. Some are in two version:
WP 5.x and WP 6/7/8 document. This is indicated by the extension: .wp for the former
and .wpd for the latter

docsummary.[wp,wpd]
  Check the document information. The author should be "Ariya",
  the title is "Test file for import filter", and the abstract
  is "This is for abstract of the document". Invoke 'Document Information..'
  from File menu in KWord to verify.

fontcolor.[wp,wpd]
  You should see some sentences. The first three have some words in different
  colors: blue, red, and green. The next one is with custom color with
  R:127, G:0, and  B: 127. The last has some part yellow highlighted.
  NOTE: highlight is not available yet in WP 5.x

fontsize.[wp,wpd]
  There are sample texts in different size of font: 10 pt, 12 pt, 14 pt, and
  20 pt respectively.

formatting.[wp,wpd]
  There are different sentences with text formatting: normal, bold,
  italic, underline, double-underline (treated as underline by the
  filter), striked out, subscript, and superscript.

justification.[wp,wpd]
  Five paragraphs, each with different justification settings: left justify,
  right justify, center, full, and all justify.

linespace.[wp,wpd]
  Different paragraphs with single, double, and one-and-half linespace.

pagemargins.[wp,wpd]
  Test settings for left, right, top, and bottom margins. Check this by
  invoking 'Page...' from 'Format' menu in KWord.

typeface.[wp,wpd]
  Has several paragraphs with different font, namely Arial, Book Antiqua,
  Century Schoolbook, Courier New and Times New Roman. Sample Arial font
  in bold and italic are also provided.

umlaut.[wp,wpd]
  Contains characters A, a, U, u, O, and o all with umlaut.

table.[wp,wpd]
  Simple table with three rows and two columns. Not supported yet.

barcode.wpd
  Contains a barcode of ZIP code: 40293. Not supported yet.

multinational.wpd
  This document contains all WP Multinational characters (of character set 1)

phonetic.wpd
  This document contains all WP Phonetic symbols (of character set 2)

typographic.wpd
  This document contains all WP Typographic symbols (of character set 4)

iconic.wpd
  This document contains all WP Iconic symbols (of character set 5)

math.wpd
  This document contains all WP math/scientific symbols (of character set 6)

mathext.wpd
  This document contains all WP additional math/scientific symbols
  (of character set 7)

greek.wpd
  This document contains all WP Greek characters (of character set 8)

hebrew.wpd
  This document contains all WP Hebrew characters (of character set 9)

cyrillic.wpd
  This document contains all WP Cyrillic characters (of character set 10)

japanese.wpd
  This document contains all WP Japanese characters (of character set 11)


Ariya Hidayat <ariyahidayat@yahoo.de>
