                         Design of KChart 2.0
                         ====================


This file describes the overall design of KChart version 2.  It is
intended for people who want to start to develop KChart, and need an
introduction to the structure of the code.  For a more detailed
description of the classes, see the API-docs generated from doxygen.


1. KOffice 1.x architecture
---------------------------

Before we start to describe the design of KChart 2.x, we should
recapitulate how KOffice 1.x was designed and also KChart 1.x.  We
will then emphasize differences between this and the new design for
those who have seen the old code.

KOffice 1.x was generally built on KParts, the general KDE embedding
technology.  Each KOffice 1.x application (component) consist of the
application itself, which is really not much more than a frame, and an
embeddable KPart.  The KPart implements the real functionality of the
application, and can also be embedded into other non-KOffice
applications, like Konqueror.

When one document embeds another, e.g. a chart in a spreadsheet, and
the user wants to edit the embedded document, the KPart for that
embedded document gets enabled inside the application of the embedding
document.  This makes the whole GUI change, and it changes back when
the embedded component is no longer active.  So, when KSpread embeds a
chart and the user double clicks the chart to edit it, the KSpread gui
changes to the KChart one.


1.1 Internals of KChart 1.x
- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

KChart 1.x is built as a GUI for the embeddable chart component
KDChart from Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB. This is a commercial
component that was graciously released under a GPL license and made
available for KOffice to use.  KDChart is built in the subdirectory
kchart/kdchart, and is really the component that provides the real
functionality for KChart.  One example of how deep the dependency of
KDChart goes is the fact that the file format for KChart 1.x is the
builtin file format for KDChart, just enhanced with very few extra XML
tags. 

KDChart is represented by mainly two classes:

 - KDChart:
       the class representing the chart itself. This is the class that
       actually draws the chart on the widget. 

 - KDChartParams
       a class that holds all parameters for the KDChart, like legend,
       fonts, colors, background image, etc, etc

In addition there is also he class KDChartTableData, which holds the
numerical and string data that is presented in the chart.  

When support for the OpenDocument format was implemented,
KDChartParams was extended by the class KChartParams.  This class was
supposed to hold all the missing parts of the ODF that was not
supported by KDChart directly, but this idea was never fully
implemented.

So, to conclude, the main classes of KChart 1.x was:

 - KChartPart : public KoDocument (via KoChart in koffice/interfaces)
       The class that held the chart document itself as represented by
       the KDChart classes above.  This class provided embedding into
       other KOffice 1.x classes as well as other KDE
       applications.  There was support for both read/write editing of
       the chart and also a read-only variation for only show.

 - KChartView : public KoView
       The class that implemented the GUI and held all the KActions.
       This was the important part of the KChart application.


2. KOffice 2.x architecture
---------------------------

The architecture of KOffice 2.x is totally different.  The most
important change is that KParts are no longer used  for embedding
documents into other documents.  Instead, embedding is done with so
called Flake Shapes, as defined and implemented by the Flake library
in koffice/libs/flake.  

A Flake Shape (from now on 'shape') can be as simple as a line or
circle, or as complex as a full spreadsheet or a chart. Each shape can
be manipulated by so called Tools, either generic tools like the
transform tool or specialized tools that only apply to one or a few
different shapes.  Examples of very specialized tools are the tools
that handle insertion and manipulation of musical notes in the Music
Score Shape.  We will not go into more details about Flake here, but
instead ask the eager developer to read the Flake API docs.


1.1 KOffice 2.x and KChart
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 

From the above, we realize that the main part of KChart for KOffice
2.x has to be a Chart Flake Shape.  This shape will contain all
necessary classes to represent the chart and the data to be shown in
the chart.  In addition, we have to provide some Flake Tools that will
aid the user in the manipulation of the chart shape.

But even if KOffice embedding is no longer done by KParts, we still
need to provide a KChart KPart.  Without it, Konqueror will not be
able to show a .odc (OpenDocument Chart) file, and neither will any
other KDE application.

We will also have to provide a main KChart application whose only
purpose will be to embed the chart shape and host the tools to
manipulate it. 

So, to summarize we will provide:

 - ChartShape : public KoShape
       the class that implements the Chart Flake Shape.  This will
       make the chart embeddable into any KOffice application

 - KChartPart
       a KPart that lets KChart be embedded into other KDE
       applications.  It is not yet clear whether KChartPart will
       simply embed a ChartShape or if it will implement it's own
       chart painting without going through the flake classes.


2.2 Internals of KChart 2.x
- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

KChart 2 will have to answer to more demands than KChart 1.  The
biggest differences is full support for OpenDocument and the Flake
embedding technology.  We will also reduce the dependency of the
KDChart library, and use it more as a pure View in the Qt/KDE sense
than the central class which also stores the data and reads/writes it
from/to files.

So here are the main classes that will be implemented for KChart 2:

 - KChartDocument : public KoDocument

       This is the central class that holds all the chart data and
       configuration.  It contains all the configuration for the chart
       as well as a pointer to a KDChart and a QStandardItemModel
       based data class (details not yet decided).

       This class is public, and can be used by other applications
       when they want to manipulate a chart, automatically or through
       a GUI like the ChartShape.  It will also have a Kross interface
       that will expose the chart to Kross scripts and a DBUS adaptor
       that will let the chart be manipulated through DBUS.

 - ChartShape : public QObject, public KoShape

       The Flake shape implementing KChart that was described above.
       This class contains a KChartDocument that represents the actual
       chart.  In connection to the shape, there are a number of
       tools, as yet undecided.

 - KChartPart

       A KPart that will let Konqueror and other browsers embed and
       preview charts.  This class also will either embed a ChartShape
       or contain the ChartDocument directly.

 - KChartView : public KoView

       The view that implements the main GUI of the KChart
       application.


